As we have seen, the challenge of monetizing a platform is more complex than in a linear business.
You have to see who creates value to whom, who you charge, how you can charge without charging the network effect
Sometimes you have to charge when you have already reached that network effect
Let's see what are the possible ways to monetize it
There are many, but we have tried to classify them into 4
Each of these 4 will have many variants, but I think that's how it is understood
The first, the simplest and if you can do it, is the ideal, is to charge a commission in each of the transactions
This is typical in a marketplace
I'll give you examples, ebay, airbnb, fiverr
Fiverr is a platform that hires freelance services
Well, this type of platforms were initially pure platforms of classifieds in which you did not pay, in which the interactions were done outside
What happens is that they have incorporated the functionality that you can pay and that the payments are established inside
When the payments are established inside, the platform charges a fee for that transaction, very simple
Tellpark, an application in which you can hire, pay parking meters in the city, etc.
Well, it manages to generate a huge volume of transacted traffic and commission for it
And in general, all platforms that can, try to pull or turn to this
Wallapop, for example, has incorporated Wallapay
Wallapop is a platform that connects supply and demand second-hand
But the interactions are traditionally generated outside
So, Wallapop has more complicated monetize it because it does not spend the money by its hands
Well, Wallapay is incorporated
It also offers value to users because you do not have to walk with the money, you pay directly in the application and such
Another case is BlaBlaCar, a startup that was born in France with a beastly growth in which travel is shared
If you are going to go from Madrid to Bilbao, you upload it to the platform and there are people who say the price of the trip and there are people who join
Initially, it did not have a monetization formula because the trips were paid by hand
The driver put a price but you went with him and you paid him there
Instead, when BlaBlaCar managed to generate a huge network effect, what it has done is to incorporate the functionality that you can pay directly within BlaBlaCar
What is much more comfortable for everyone, therefore, not only more comfortable for everyone but for them it is much better because they are already transacting all that money and it remains in a percentage
There is another model that was the traditional of the classifieds, which is to charge the creators for being present, for having their offer
A very clear case is that of real estate portals, in traditional real estate portals, the one who wants to sell or rent a house, uploads the house to the portal
And it pays for being, it is a freemium service because private individuals do not pay but professionals do, but the concept is to pay for being
In this idealistic case, it could not interfere with the payments of the sales, it would be very complicated, we are talking about many millions of the sales of the houses
And in addition to paying for being, many platforms incorporate features in which not only for being but for standing out
And this could be equivalent in many cases to the freemium, in the case of real estate portals it is also like that
The payment formulas are complex, that is, you pay for being, you pay for being highlighted, you pay for your ads to stand out, etc.
In the case of LinkedIn it is also like that, the same users, in this case LinkedIn is not an offer and demand but they are users, if you want to stand out, for example, your profile is to be more visible by recruiters, etc.
Well, you pay for being, you pay for being, you pay for standing out, Wallapop offers the same, the first option of monetization of Wallapop is this, Wallapop offers you when you upload something to sell it to Wallapop, it offers you a highlighted product and you pay for that
We have called this freemium, but the concept is that you can pay for being but you can also pay for standing out, for highlighting your offer, for highlighting your content
And another of the traditional ways, in a platform, is not to charge users themselves, in LinkedIn it is not to charge users, it is to charge third parties, and this is the most advertising model, Facebook ads, for example
I give you this example, but it is applicable to many examples, whenever a platform has users, has a lot of traffic and monetizes it because it gives access to third parties, to be announced, to access in some way to those users, we would be talking about this model
And Facebook ads is the best example of all, within Facebook millions and millions of interactions are published, users, etc., and what we do is almost all companies in the world, we pay Facebook to have access to those users within the platform